README.rst, before:

******************
Mopidy-Touchscreen
******************

This is a port of 9and3r's original TFT Touchscreen exstension for Mopidy
to Mopidy 3.2 and Python3. It also allows redirecting the ouptput to an
unaccelerated framebuffer device (which can't be utilized by SDL2) such as
those numerous SPI or I2C displays. A number of other changes have been
applied as well, see below. But it still looks the same:


.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/Mopidy-Touchscreen.svg?style=flat
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Mopidy-Touchscreen/
    :alt: Latest PyPI version

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/Mopidy-Touchscreen.svg?style=flat
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Mopidy-Touchscreen/
    :alt: Number of PyPI downloads

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/travis/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen/develop.svg?style=flat
    :target: https://travis-ci.org/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen
    :alt: Travis CI build status

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/coveralls/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen/develop.svg?style=flat
   :target: https://coveralls.io/r/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen?branch=develop
   :alt: Test coverage

Extension for displaying track info and controlling Mopidy from a touch screen
using `PyGame <http://www.pygame.org/>`_/SDL.

Cover images are downloaded from `last.fm <http://www.last.fm/api>`_ Probably.


Dependencies
============

- ``Mopidy`` >= 3.2
- ``Pykka`` >= 1.1
- ``pygame``


Installation
============

Install by running::

   python3 setup.py

Basic Configuration
===================

Before starting Mopidy, you must add configuration for
Mopidy-Touchscreen to your Mopidy configuration file::

    [touchscreen]
    enabled = true
    screen_width = 320
    screen_height = 240
    resolution_factor = 8
    cursor = True
    fullscreen = False
    cache_dir = $XDG_CACHE_DIR/mopidy/touchscreen

The following configuration values are available:

- ``touchscreen/enabled``: If the Touchscreen extension should be enabled or not.

- ``touchscreen/screen_width``: The width of the resolution you want to use in pixels.

- ``touchscreen/screen_height``: The width of the resolution you want to use in pixels.

- ``touchscreen/resolution_factor``: This value sets how big content is shown. Smaller values will make content bigger and less content will be displayed at once.

- ``touchscreen/cursor``: If the mouse cursor should be shown. (If you use a touchscreen it should be false)

- ``touchscreen/fullscreen``: If you want to be shown as a window or in fullscreen.

- ``touchscreen/cache_dir``: The folder to be used as cache. Defaults to ``$XDG_CACHE_DIR/mopidy/touchscreen``, which usually means `~/.cache/mopidy/touchscreen``

- ``touchscreen/fbdev``: The framebuffer to write to. SDL will grab the first suitable device anyway if this doesn't point to a supported device, but actual output will occur on this device.

- ``touchscreen/evdev``: Use evdev support. Current Raspberry Pi distributions provide overlays that make GPIO pins behave like input devices. See below. Also supports lircd's uinput device.

- ``touchscreen/sdl_output``: If set to True, the screen content will be written directly to the device specified in fbdev, bypassing SDL output. Nevertheless, SDL will still grab a supported video device and input devices. There's no way around that except for moving away from pygame.

- ``sdl_videodriver``: Sets the SDL_VIDEDRIVER environment variable. No idea if that actually does something.

- ``sdl_audiodriver``: Sets the SDL_AUDIODRIVER environment variable

- ``sdl_path_dsp``: Sets the SDL_PATH_DSP environment variable

- ``sdl_mousedriver``: Sets the SDL_MOUSEDRV environment variable. This has been renamed from ``sdl_mousdrv``

- ``sdl_mousedev``: Sets the SDL_MOUSEDEV environment variable. This has been renamed from ``sdl_mousdev``.

- ``start_screen``: The menu screen Mopidy shows on start can be configured. Valid options are ``search``, ``player``, ``tracklist``,  ``library``, ``playlists`` and ``menu``

- ``main_screen``: This is the menu screen Mopidy will return to after twenty seconds of no tap, button or key press. Choices as with ``start_screen``, plus ``none`` to disable.


How to Setup
============

Use the basic configuration to setup as most standard screens works fine without further configuration.

Running Mopidy without root privileges
--------------------------------------

It's recommended to create an unprivileged user ``mopdiy``. Add this user to the ``video`` and ``input`` groups.

LCD Shields
-----------

If you are using a LCD Shield in Raspberry Pi you need to config your LCD:

Configure your LCD Shield
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Configure the driver in /boot/config.txt, for example with:

    dtoverlay=rpi-display,rotate=90,brightness=192

for an Ilitek ILI9341 display. The overlay comes with support for an ADS7846 touch controller on SPI 1.

Add to the config the next variables::

    [touchscreen]
    sdl_fbdev = /dev/fb1
    sdl_output = False

This is just an example. It may work but each LCD Shield seems to have its own configuration.


GPIO Buttons
------------

Native GPIO support has been removed, you can define GPIO inputs as input devices in ``/boot/config.txt`` these days, for example:

    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=13,keycode=105,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up        # left
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=6,keycode=106,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # right
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=19,keycode=103,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up        # up
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=26,keycode=108,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up        # down
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=1,keycode=28,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up          # enter
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=0,keycode=114,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # -
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=5,keycode=115,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # +
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=3,keycode=116,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # shutdown

The actual GPIO port (BCM numbering for RPi) depends on your wiring. See https://pinout.xyz/ if unsure.

As you can see from this example, pins should be active low (ie, button press connects the pin to ground)

How To Use
==========

You can use it with a touchscreen or mouse clicking on the icons.

In case you are using a keyboard use arrow keys to navigate and enter to select. The GPIO and LIRC (IR remote control) buttons  simulate keyboard keys so the use is exactly the same as using a keyboard.


Features
========

* See track info (track name, album, artist, cover image)
* Seek Track
* Play/Pause/Stop
* Mute/Unmute
* Change volume
* Next/Previous track
* Library
* Menu (exit mopidy, restart...)
* Shuffle on/off
* Repeat one/on/off
* Playback list and song selection
* Playlists
* Use keyboard. GPIO buttons or IR remote control instead of touchscreen


Video
=====

`Example video running the extension <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KuYoIb8Q2LI>`_

Authors
=======

- 9and3r (http://github.com/9and3r): 
  Original author and maintainer for many years. Thanks!

- Joerg Reuter (http://github.com/woelfisch): 
  Port to Python 3, Mopidy 3.2, bug fixes, new bugs


Changelog
=========

v1.1.0 (2021-07-29, woelfisch fork)
-----------------------------------

- Require Mopidy v3.2.x and Python 3.7
- Restructure source code to avoid circular imports
- Adjust to current Mopidy Core API
- Port to Python 3 (mainly fix formerly implicit float to int conversions)
- Use Enums god*mmit...
- Search for Artist and Album broken, apparently Mopidy Core issue
- Write directly to framebuffer device
- Add support to automatically return to configurable menu screen
- Make start menu screen configurable
- Add more LIRC / Keyboard actions
- Support evdev (LIRC uinput, gpio-key drivers) devices
- Drop GPIO driver

v1.0.0 (2015-05-26, last 9and3r version)
----------------------------------------

- Require Mopidy v1.0
- Update to work with changed core playback API in Mopidy 1.0
- Search working
- GPIO and Keyboard support
- Resolution factor to adapt the interface for different screen sizes (Thanks to `Syco54645 <https://github.com/Syco54645>`_)
- Background image
- Lower CPU usage (Update screen only when needed)
- Bug Fixes

v0.3.2 (2015-01-09)
-------------------

- Bug Fixes
- UI changes
- Smooth text scrolling
- Search albums, artist or songs (Not fully implemented. Basic functionality)

v0.2.1 (2014-08-02)
-------------------

- Font will be included on installation

v0.2.0 (2014-08-02)
-------------------

- First working version

Commit message:

Use MusicBrainz and the Cover Art Archive to download cover art

README.rst, after:

******************
Mopidy-Touchscreen
******************

This is a port of 9and3r's original TFT Touchscreen exstension for Mopidy
to Mopidy 3.2 and Python3. It also allows redirecting the ouptput to an
unaccelerated framebuffer device (which can't be utilized by SDL2) such as
those numerous SPI or I2C displays. A number of other changes have been
applied as well, see below. But it still looks the same:


.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/Mopidy-Touchscreen.svg?style=flat
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Mopidy-Touchscreen/
    :alt: Latest PyPI version

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/Mopidy-Touchscreen.svg?style=flat
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Mopidy-Touchscreen/
    :alt: Number of PyPI downloads

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/travis/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen/develop.svg?style=flat
    :target: https://travis-ci.org/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen
    :alt: Travis CI build status

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/coveralls/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen/develop.svg?style=flat
   :target: https://coveralls.io/r/9and3r/mopidy-touchscreen?branch=develop
   :alt: Test coverage

Extension for displaying track info and controlling Mopidy from a touch screen
using `PyGame <http://www.pygame.org/>`_/SDL.

Album Cover images are downloaded from the Cover Art Archive
`<https://coverartarchive.org/>`_ with the help of MusicBrainz
`<https://musicbrainz.org/>`_ and the musicbrainzngs module
`<https://python-musicbrainzngs.readthedocs.io/en/v0.7.1/>`_

Dependencies
============

- ``Mopidy`` >= 3.2
- ``Pykka`` >= 1.1
- ``pygame``
- ``musicbrainzngs`` >= 0.7.1


Installation
============

Install by running::

   python3 setup.py

Basic Configuration
===================

Before starting Mopidy, you must add configuration for
Mopidy-Touchscreen to your Mopidy configuration file::

    [touchscreen]
    enabled = true
    screen_width = 320
    screen_height = 240
    resolution_factor = 8
    cursor = True
    fullscreen = False
    cache_dir = $XDG_CACHE_DIR/mopidy/touchscreen

The following configuration values are available:

- ``touchscreen/enabled``: If the Touchscreen extension should be enabled or not.

- ``touchscreen/screen_width``: The width of the resolution you want to use in pixels.

- ``touchscreen/screen_height``: The width of the resolution you want to use in pixels.

- ``touchscreen/resolution_factor``: This value sets how big content is shown. Smaller values will make content bigger and less content will be displayed at once.

- ``touchscreen/cursor``: If the mouse cursor should be shown. (If you use a touchscreen it should be false)

- ``touchscreen/fullscreen``: If you want to be shown as a window or in fullscreen.

- ``touchscreen/cache_dir``: The folder to be used as cache. Defaults to ``$XDG_CACHE_DIR/mopidy/touchscreen``, which usually means `~/.cache/mopidy/touchscreen``

- ``touchscreen/fbdev``: The framebuffer to write to. SDL will grab the first suitable device anyway if this doesn't point to a supported device, but actual output will occur on this device.

- ``touchscreen/evdev``: Use evdev support. Current Raspberry Pi distributions provide overlays that make GPIO pins behave like input devices. See below. Also supports lircd's uinput device.

- ``touchscreen/sdl_output``: If set to True, the screen content will be written directly to the device specified in fbdev, bypassing SDL output. Nevertheless, SDL will still grab a supported video device and input devices. There's no way around that except for moving away from pygame.

- ``sdl_videodriver``: Sets the SDL_VIDEDRIVER environment variable. No idea if that actually does something.

- ``sdl_audiodriver``: Sets the SDL_AUDIODRIVER environment variable

- ``sdl_path_dsp``: Sets the SDL_PATH_DSP environment variable

- ``sdl_mousedriver``: Sets the SDL_MOUSEDRV environment variable. This has been renamed from ``sdl_mousdrv``

- ``sdl_mousedev``: Sets the SDL_MOUSEDEV environment variable. This has been renamed from ``sdl_mousdev``.

- ``start_screen``: The menu screen Mopidy shows on start can be configured. Valid options are ``search``, ``player``, ``tracklist``,  ``library``, ``playlists`` and ``menu``

- ``main_screen``: This is the menu screen Mopidy will return to after twenty seconds of no tap, button or key press. Choices as with ``start_screen``, plus ``none`` to disable.


How to Setup
============

Use the basic configuration to setup as most standard screens works fine without further configuration.

Running Mopidy without root privileges
--------------------------------------

It's recommended to create an unprivileged user ``mopdiy``. Add this user to the ``video`` and ``input`` groups.

LCD Shields
-----------

If you are using a LCD Shield in Raspberry Pi you need to config your LCD:

Configure your LCD Shield
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Configure the driver in /boot/config.txt, for example with:

    dtoverlay=rpi-display,rotate=90,brightness=192

for an Ilitek ILI9341 display. The overlay comes with support for an ADS7846 touch controller on SPI 1.

Add to the config the next variables::

    [touchscreen]
    sdl_fbdev = /dev/fb1
    sdl_output = False

This is just an example. It may work but each LCD Shield seems to have its own configuration.


GPIO Buttons
------------

Native GPIO support has been removed, you can define GPIO inputs as input devices in ``/boot/config.txt`` these days, for example:

    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=13,keycode=105,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up        # left
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=6,keycode=106,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # right
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=19,keycode=103,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up        # up
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=26,keycode=108,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up        # down
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=1,keycode=28,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up          # enter
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=0,keycode=114,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # -
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=5,keycode=115,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # +
    dtoverlay=gpio-key,gpio=3,keycode=116,active_low=1,gpio_pull=up         # shutdown

The actual GPIO port (BCM numbering for RPi) depends on your wiring. See https://pinout.xyz/ if unsure.

As you can see from this example, pins should be active low (ie, button press connects the pin to ground)

How To Use
==========

You can use it with a touchscreen or mouse clicking on the icons.

In case you are using a keyboard use arrow keys to navigate and enter to select. The GPIO and LIRC (IR remote control) buttons  simulate keyboard keys so the use is exactly the same as using a keyboard.


Features
========

* See track info (track name, album, artist, cover image)
* Seek Track
* Play/Pause/Stop
* Mute/Unmute
* Change volume
* Next/Previous track
* Library
* Menu (exit mopidy, restart...)
* Shuffle on/off
* Repeat one/on/off
* Playback list and song selection
* Playlists
* Use keyboard. GPIO buttons or IR remote control instead of touchscreen


Video
=====

`Example video running the extension <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KuYoIb8Q2LI>`_

Authors
=======

- 9and3r (http://github.com/9and3r): 
  Original author and maintainer for many years. Thanks!

- Joerg Reuter (http://github.com/woelfisch): 
  Port to Python 3, Mopidy 3.2, bug fixes, new bugs


Changelog
=========

2021-08-01 (woelfisch fork)
----------------------------

- last.fm cover art service has been dead for how long? Use MusicBrainz.
- Code cleanup

v1.1.0 (2021-07-29, woelfisch fork)
-----------------------------------

- Require Mopidy v3.2.x and Python 3.7
- Restructure source code to avoid circular imports
- Adjust to current Mopidy Core API
- Port to Python 3 (mainly fix formerly implicit float to int conversions)
- Use Enums god*mmit...
- Search for Artist and Album broken, apparently Mopidy Core issue
- Write directly to framebuffer device
- Add support to automatically return to configurable menu screen
- Make start menu screen configurable
- Add more LIRC / Keyboard actions
- Support evdev (LIRC uinput, gpio-key drivers) devices
- Drop GPIO driver

v1.0.0 (2015-05-26, last 9and3r version)
----------------------------------------

- Require Mopidy v1.0
- Update to work with changed core playback API in Mopidy 1.0
- Search working
- GPIO and Keyboard support
- Resolution factor to adapt the interface for different screen sizes (Thanks to `Syco54645 <https://github.com/Syco54645>`_)
- Background image
- Lower CPU usage (Update screen only when needed)
- Bug Fixes

v0.3.2 (2015-01-09)
-------------------

- Bug Fixes
- UI changes
- Smooth text scrolling
- Search albums, artist or songs (Not fully implemented. Basic functionality)

v0.2.1 (2014-08-02)
-------------------

- Font will be included on installation

v0.2.0 (2014-08-02)
-------------------

- First working version
